[SYCL] [DOC] Group sorting algorithm design review (#11974)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/design/GroupSort.md

# Group sort algorithm

> Group sorting algorithms are needed to sort data without calling additional kernels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group sorting algorithms are needed to sort data without calling additional kernels.
```

using RSorter = oneapi_exp::radix_sorter<T, oneapi_exp::sorting_order::descending>;
// calculate required local memory size
size_t temp_memory_size =
    RSorter::memory_required(sycl::memory_scope::work_group, local_range);
q.submit([&](sycl::handler& h) {
  auto acc = sycl::accessor(buf, h);
  auto scratch = sycl::local_accessor<std::byte, 1>( {temp_memory_size}, h);
  h.parallel_for(
    sycl::nd_range<1>{ local_range, local_range },
    [=](sycl::nd_item<1> id) {
      acc[id.get_local_id()] =
        oneapi_exp::sort_over_group(
          id.get_group(),
          acc[id.get_local_id()],
          RSorter(sycl::span{scratch.get_pointer(), temp_memory_size})
      );
    });
  });
...
```

## Design objectives

In DPC++ Headers/DPC++ RT we don't know which sorting algorithm is better for
different architectures. Backends have more capability to optimize the sorting algorithm
using low-level instructions.

Data types that should be supported by backends: arithmetic types
(https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/arithmetic_types), `sycl::half`.

Comparators that should be supported by backends: `std::less`, `std::greater`,

> custom comparators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and custom comparators.
```

## Design

Overall, for backend support we need to have the following:
- Fallback implementation of sorting algorithms for user's types, comparators and/or sorters.

- Backend implementation for types, comparators and/or sorters
  that can be optimized using backend specific instructions.

  **NOTE**: It was decided that `radix_sorter` will be implemented only in DPC++ Headers since
it's difficult to support such algorithm at backends' level.

- Fallback implementation in case if backends don't have more optimized implementations yet.

> - Level Zero extension for `memory_required` functions.

Reviewer 2: We do not directly call into Level Zero from SYCL RT, but instead we go through [unified runtime](https://github.com/oneapi-src/unified-runtime/tree/main). Therefore, if we need a new API to do queries to low-level runtimes, then UR should also be updated

- [x] The `radix_order` enum class.
- [x] `group_with_scratchpad` predefined group helper.
- [x] `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_GROUP_SORT` feature macro.
- [ ] `sort_over_group` with `span`-based parameters.
- [ ] Level Zero extension for `memory_required` functions
  - [ ] Specification.
  - [ ] Implementation.
- [ ] Backend support for sorting algorithms.
  - [ ] Default sorter
- [ ] Fallback library if device doesn't implement functions.

**Note**: The "tick" means that corresponding feature is implemented.

Sections below describe each component in more details.

### DPC++ Headers

DPC++ Headers contain the following:
- required definitions of `joint_sort`, `sort_over_group` functions, `radix_order` enum class,
  `default_sorter`, `radix_sorter` classes with corresponding `operator()`
  as well as other classes and methods.

- Checks if radix sort is applicable for provided data types.

- Traits to distinguish interfaces with `Compare` and `Sorter` parameters.

- Fallback solution for user's types, user's comparators and/or user's sorters.

### Level Zero

To implement `memory_required` methods for sorters we need to calculate
how much temporary memory is needed.

> However, we don't have an information how much memory is needed by backend compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we don't know how much memory is needed by backend compiler.
```

                                                     long totalItems,
                                                     long rangeSize,
                                                     long keyTypeSizeInBytes,
                                                     long valueTypeSizeInBytes) const;

    // Returns required amount of memory for default private memory work-group or sub-group sort
    // devicelib builtin function in bytes per workgroup (or sub-group), >= 0
    // or -1 if the algorithm for the specified parameters is not implemented
    //
    // itemsPerWorkItem -- number of elements in private array to sort
    // rangeSize -- work-group or sub-group size respectively
    //
    // For key-only sort pass valueTypeSizeInBytes = 0
    virtual long DefaultGroupPrivateSortMemoryRequired(GroupSortMemoryScope::MemoryScope_t scope,
                                                       long itemsPerWorkItem,
                                                       long rangeSize,
                                                       long keyTypeSizeInBytes,
                                                       long valueTypeSizeInBytes) const;
```

> ### Fallback SPIR-V library

Reviewer 2: It is expected that device compiler implements those functions as part of some "extension" so that SYCL RT can query if there is native support for that functionality and link fallback libraries if there is not. See [extension spec, which is more of a design doc](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/C-CXX-StandardLibrary.rst#device-compiler).

What should be the name of this "library"/"extension"? Should there be several of them so we can only link-in those libraries which are actually used (in case they would be huge)?

If backend compilers can generate optimized implementations based on low-level instructions,
we need a function that they can take and optimize.

If there are no implementations in a backend yet,
implementations from the fallback library will be called.

Interface for the library and backends:

```cpp
// for default sorting algorithm
void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

> // for fixed-size arrays

Reviewer 2: [language extension spec](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc) does not mention any special handling for fixed-size arrays and therefore it is not clear to me where built-ins from this section are going to be used - can it be clarified?

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_close_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_close_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_spread_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_spread_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

// for sub-groups
T __devicelib_default_sub_group_private_sort_ascending_<encoded_scalar_param_type>(T value);

T __devicelib_default_sub_group_private_sort_descending_<encoded_scalar_param_type>(T value);

> // for key value sorting using the default algorithm

Reviewer 2: Same as previous comments: there is no mention of key-value sorting in the language spec and some implementation detail is clearly implied here, even though I don't understand which one - I think that it should be explicitly spelled out that high-level SYCL functions are built on top these low-level functions using the following mapping ...

void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

// for key value sorting using fixed-size arrays
void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_close_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_close_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_spread_ascending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_spread_descending_<encoded_param_types>(T* keys_first, U* values_first, uint n, byte* scratch);

```

Notes:

> - `T`, `U` are from the following list `i8`, `i16`,

Reviewer 2: For functions which accept `T*` and `U*` which combinations of different types should be implemented in the fallback library? All 11*11, or only some sub-set?

  `i32`, `i64`, `u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `f16`, `f32`, `f64`.

> - `encoded_param_types` is `T` prepended with `p1` for global/private address

Reviewer 2: But not `U`?

  space and `p3` for shared local memory.
- `first` is a pointer to the actual data for sorting.
- The type of `n` (number of elements) is u32.
- `keys_first` points to "keys" for key-value sorting.
  "Keys" are comparing and moving during the sorting.
- `scratch` is a temporary storage (local or global) that can be used by backends.
  The type of `scratch` is always `byte*`.
- `values_first` points to "values" for key-value sorting. "Keys" are only moving
  corresponding the "keys" order during the sorting.

Examples:
```cpp

> void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_ascending_p1i32_u32_p3i8(int* first, uint n, byte* scratch);

Reviewer 3: We have `p1`/`p3` in the "mangling" but actual operands are generic address space, is that expected?

Also, just an idea to discuss, we use the same device compiler on Lin/Win so the C++ mangling is stable. Can we use a normal C++ template with "extern template" to avoid manual mangling?

void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_descending_p1u32_u32_p1i8(uint* first, uint n, byte* scratch);
void __devicelib_default_work_group_joint_sort_ascending_p3u32_p3u32_u32_p1i8(uint* first_keys, uint* first_values, uint n, byte* scratch);
void __devicelib_default_work_group_private_sort_close_ascending_p1u32_p1u32_u32_p1i8(uint* first_keys, uint* first_values, uint n, byte* scratch);
double __devicelib_default_sub_group_private_sort_ascending_f64(double value);
```

## Alternative Design

> If it's proved that no specific improvements can be done at backends' level (e.g. special

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it's proven that no specific improvements can be done at backend level (e.g. special
```

> instructions, hardware dispatch) comparing to high-level SYCL code then implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instructions, hardware dispatch) compared to high-level SYCL code then implementations
```

                                                     long keyTypeSizeInBytes,
                                                     long valueTypeSizeInBytes) const;

    // Returns required amount of memory for default private memory work-group or sub-group sort
    // devicelib builtin function in bytes per workgroup (or sub-group), >= 0
    // or -1 if the algorithm for the specified parameters is not implemented
    //
    // itemsPerWorkItem -- number of elements in private array to sort
    // rangeSize -- work-group or sub-group size respectively
    //
    // For key-only sort pass valueTypeSizeInBytes = 0
    virtual long DefaultGroupPrivateSortMemoryRequired(GroupSortMemoryScope::MemoryScope_t scope,
                                                       long itemsPerWorkItem,
                                                       long rangeSize,
                                                       long keyTypeSizeInBytes,
                                                       long valueTypeSizeInBytes) const;
```

### Fallback SPIR-V library

If backend compilers can generate optimized implementations based on low-level instructions,

> we need a function that they can take and optimize.

Author: @gmlueck, 
Does it relate to sorting functions only or to all functions in device lib like cmath, complex,...?

+@jinge90

> we need a function that they can take and optimize.

Reviewer 4: To all functions.  The conversation that @bader, @AlexeySachkov, and I had earlier was about the existing usage in cmath, etc.

> we need a function that they can take and optimize.

Author: I see. I'm afraid it requires a lot of efforts to rewrite API for IGC, CPU backend, and other components. That's great that multiple teams have committed to make a lot of changes for their code

> we need a function that they can take and optimize.

Reviewer 4: Is IGC currently providing implementations for these "__devicelib" functions, or are we relying on the fallback implementations?
